System Examples Appendix (#148)
ietf-rats-wg/architecture: draft-ietf-rats-architecture.md

valid.  Thus, if the Attestation Result sends a validity lifetime
in terms of time(RX)-time(RG), then the Relying Party can check
`time(OP) - time(ER) < time(RX)-time(RG)`.

> # Appendix B: System Examples

Reviewer: I think that by "System", you mean something specific, yet the text is rather general.  I suggest making the example even more specific: pick one of Smartphone. Desktop PC. VoIP phone. Smart IoT Speaker.

Author: By "system" I mean an end-end set of entities that make up a complete function system with nothing left out. The suggestion of Smartphone doesn't work because it is only a small part of the "system". I'm OK with a different word, perhaps "End-to-end Complete Examples"?

(Rough first draft to see if there is interest)

## System Example with OS Vendor as Main Driver

Three entities (companies / organizations) participate in this examples.

> The operating system vendor is at the center. It sets the architecture and the level of security achieved. It performs the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The operating system vendor is at the center. It sets the architecture and the level of security intended. It performs the following:
```

* Generates large quantities of ECDSA key pairs to be used as per-device attestation keys
* Signs the public keys using an attestation PKI and root that they control creating per-device certificates.

> * Securely sends the private keys and certificates to the device OEM in batches to be used in manufacturing

Reviewer: Assumes factory generated keys, which is a reasonable choice.  I suggest making this choice explicit.

Author: They are  not factory generated at least not in the factory that makes the devices.  They are generated by the OS vendor, hopefully in a secure cryptographic operations center.

Reviewer 2: now I am confused

> * Securely sends the private keys and certificates to the device OEM in batches to be used in manufacturing

Author: This is the only way it can work in this particular example.

I don't want to name companies, but some people are really doing this.

> * Securely sends the private keys and certificates to the device OEM in batches to be used in manufacturing

Reviewer 2: now I am more concerned than before

> * Authors the device SW that is the Attester and ships it to the OEMs. This is a part of the OS.

Reviewer: "This is part of the OS" is probably incorrect for many situations.

Author: I think it is reasonable in this example.  Think of an OS vendor like Google supplying both the TEE which has the attester and Android.  

In some cases the TEE is made by another, but adding that would complicate the example a lot for little gain.

* Publishes the root certificate and definition of the claims

The device OEM does the manufacturing. It performs the following:
* Physically makes the device to OS vendors security requirements
* Installs the OS on the device
* Personalizes each device with a unique private key and certificate supplied by the OS vendor

The application vendor that implements some application with a back-end cloud service. It performs the following:

> * Author an app on the device that calls the attestation API to obtain Attestation Evidence

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Author software that runs on the device that calls the attestation API to obtain Attestation Evidence
```

* Convey the Attestation Evidence to the back-end cloud service over the network

> * Verify the Attestation Evidence and decided whether or not to allow application service

Reviewer 2: There seems to be a back-end cloud service. That service permits service use, if valid Evidence can be presented by the App.

This maps as follows in the RATS architecture:

Endorser:

: The operating system vendor is the endorser

Endorsement:

> : The root certificate published by the endorser

Author: I can see it either way. I picked the root because the root flows directly from the Endorser to the Verifier, where as the device's cert does not flow directly.

Attester:

: The HW made by the device OEM and the SW made by the OS vendor

> Attestation Evidence:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Evidence:
```

: A protocol message generated by the Attester on the request of the application that is then sent to the application vendor cloud service.

Verifier and Verifier Owner:

: are run by the application vendor cloud service

Relying Party and Relying Party Owner:

: are also the application vendor cloud service; since the Verify and Relying Part are the same the distinction between passport and background check doesn’t apply.

Attestation Result:

: non existent as the Verifier is the same as the Rely Party

> ## System Example Made Up of Chip Vendor and IoT Device Maker

Reviewer: This is a second example.  Maybe we can process each example as a separate PR?

> Two entities (companies / organizations) participate in this example.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Two companies or organizations participate in this example.
```

The chip vendor that makes the chip. They also make the SW that is the Attester. It does the following:
* Manufacturers the chip
* Authors the SW that runs on the chip that is the Attester
* Personalizes each chip with a unique 256-bit symmetric key and key ID
* Also stores the 256-bit symmetric key in a well-secured database

> * Operates a web-based HMAC verification service the inputs to which are the key ID and HMAC to verify and the output is a yes or no on the verification

Reviewer: I don't think that this level of detail about key generate belongs in the RATS architecture, even as an appendix.

The IoT device maker buys chips from the vendor, makes the chip the core of an IoT device (perhaps sensors for a home security service). It does the following:
* Manufacturers and a device that an end user may purchase
* Adds their own SW to the device over the top of the SW the chip vendor supplied
* Operates a cloud-based service with which the device interacts
* An Attestation Evidence is included whenever the IoT device communicates with the cloud service
* The cloud service decodes the Attestation Evidence to get the key ID and computes the HMAC for it
* The close service sends the key ID and HMAC to the chip vendors verification service

This maps as follows in the RATS architecture:

Endorser:

: The chip vendor is the Endorser

Endorsement:

: The Endorsement only exists virtually inside the chip vendor

Attester:

: The HW and SW made by the chip vendor

Attestation Evidence:

: A protocol message generated by the Attester sent to the cloud service operated by the IoT device vendor

Verifier and Verifier Owner:

> : The Verifier and Verifier Owner are split with part run by the chip vendor and part run by the IoT device maker

Reviewer 3: This is hard to understand.  What "part" is run by each?

Relying Party and Relying Party Owner:

> : are also the application vendor cloud service; since the Verify and Relying Part are the same the distinction between passport and background check doesn’t apply.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: are also the application vendor cloud service; since the Verifier and Relying Party are part of the same service, this is the Background Check model.
```

Attestation Result:

> : non existent as the Verifier is the same as the Rely Party

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: represented by internal APIs or state, since the Verifier is the same as the Relying Party
```

> ## System Example Base on a Third Party Verification Service

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## System Example Based on a Third-Party Verification Service
```

> Three entities (companies / organizations) participate in this example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Three companies or organizations participate in this example:
```

First off, there is a device maker. It does the following:

> * Manufacturers devices using HW and SW of their choice that includes an Attester

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Manufactures devices using hardware and software of their choice that includes an Attester
```

> * Puts an attestation key into each device (symmetric or asymmetric)

Reviewer 3: As I observed on the first example, this is less secure than other examples would be where the key is generated by the device itself and the private key is never seen by anyone including the manufacturer, only the public key.

* Has the device certified by one or more certification programs

> * Generates a detailed Endorsement for each device that includes the verification key, list of certifications, reference measurement values and implicit claims

Reviewer: This example says far less (either choice) about key generation, which validates my belief that the level of detail in the first two cases was inappropriate.

> * Generates a detailed Endorsement for each device that includes the verification key, list of certifications, reference measurement values and implicit claims

Reviewer 3: "implicit claims" is still an undefined term

The Relying Party operates some cloud service for which attestation needed, perhaps a payment service. It does the following:

> * Receives service requests from devices. The service requests includes Attestation Evidence.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Receives service requests from devices. The service requests include Attestation Evidence.
```

> * Sends the Attestation Evidence to a 3rd party verification service.
> * Receives Attestation Results from 3rd party verification service.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Sends the Attestation Evidence to a third-party verification service.
* Receives Attestation Results from third-party verification service.
```

* Decides whether to grant the service, perhaps varying the payment amount allowed based on details that are in the Attestation Result such the certifications the device has received

The 3rd Party Verification and Attestation Aggregation Service. It does the following:
* Receives Attestation Evidence from the Relying Party (This uses the Background Check Model)
* Looks up the Endorsement by an Endorsement identifier, perhaps a URI, and receives the Endorsement from the device maker, most likely over a channel that has both confidentiality, integrity protection and authentication.

> * Performs the Verification of the Attestation Evidence which involves: verifying the signature on the Attestation Evidence and comparison of claims to reference values in the Endorsement.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Performs the Verification of the Attestation Evidence which involves: verifying the signature on the Attestation Evidence and comparison of claims to reference values provided along with the Endorsement.
```

Also, if this is intended to be a complete list, it's insecure, since nothing in this sentence does a freshness check for example.

* Generates the Attestation Results which involves making some new values that report the result of comparison to the reference values and copying implied claims from the Endorsements and copying some claims from the Attestation Evidence

This maps as follows in the RATS architecture:

Endorser:

: The device maker

Endorsement:

> : A detailed message created by the device maker that is secured for confidentiality that contains reference values, the verification key and implicit claims

Reviewer 3: See PR #150

Attester: 

> : The HW and SW made by the device maker

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: The hardware and software made by the device maker
```

> Attestation Evidence:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Evidence:
```

: A protocol message generated by the Attester sent to the Relying Party

Verifier and Verifier Owner:

> : A third-party Attestation service that can process Attestation Evidence from many different device makers and provide results to many different Relying Parties.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: A third-party Attestation service that can process Evidence from many different device makers and provide results to many different Relying Parties.
```

Relying Party and Relying Party Owner:

> : The operator of a cloud-based payment service.

Reviewer 3: No, the Relying Party is the payment service itself.  The operator of it is the Relying Party Owner.

Attestation Result:

> : A detailed set of claims with 1) claims copied forward from the Attestation Evidence , 2) implied claims copied through from the Endorsement and 3) new claims created to report the result of comparison to reference values

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
: A detailed set of claims with 1) claims copied forward from the Evidence, 2) implied claims copied through from the Endorsement, and 3) new claims created to report the result of comparison to reference values
```
